The first step in data mining requires you to set up goals for the exercise. Obviously, you must identify the key questions that need to be answered. However, going beyond identifying the key questions are the concerns about the costs and benefits of the exercise. Furthermore, you must determine, in advance, the expected level of accuracy and usefulness of the results obtained from data mining. If money were no object, you could throw as many funds as necessary to get the answers required. However, the cost-benefit trade-off is always instrumental in determining the goals and scope of the data mining exercise. The level of accuracy expected from the results also influences the costs. High levels of accuracy from data mining would cost more and vice versa. Furthermore, beyond a certain level of accuracy, you do not gain much from the exercise, given the diminishing returns. Thus, the cost-benefit trade-offs for the desired level of accuracy are important considerations for data mining goals.

Selecting Data
The output of a data-mining exercise largely depends upon the quality of data being used. At times, data are readily available for further processing. For instance, retailers often possess large databases of customer purchases and demographics. On the other hand, data may not be readily available for data mining. In such cases, you must identify other sources of data or even plan new data collection initiatives, including surveys. The type of data, its size, and frequency of collection have a direct bearing on the cost of data mining exercise. Therefore, identifying the right kind of data needed for data mining that could answer the questions at reasonable costs is critical.

Preprocessing Data
Preprocessing data is an important step in data mining. Often raw data are messy, containing erroneous or irrelevant data. In addition, even with relevant data, information is sometimes missing. In the preprocessing stage, you identify the irrelevant attributes of data and expunge such attributes from further consideration. At the same time, identifying the erroneous aspects of the data set and flagging them as such is necessary. For instance, human error might lead to inadvertent merging or incorrect parsing of information between columns. Data should be subject to checks to ensure integrity. Lastly, you must develop a formal method of dealing with missing data and determine whether the data are missing randomly or systematically.

If the data were missing randomly, a simple set of solutions would suffice. However, when data are missing in a systematic way, you must determine the impact of missing data on the results. For instance, a particular subset of individuals in a large data set may have refused to disclose their income. Findings relying on an individual's income as input would exclude details of those individuals whose income was not reported. This would lead to systematic biases in the analysis. Therefore, you must consider in advance if observations or variables containing missing data be excluded from the entire analysis or parts of it.

Transforming Data
After the relevant attributes of data have been retained, the next step is to determine the appropriate format in which data must be stored. An important consideration in data mining is to reduce the number of attributes needed to explain the phenomena. This may require transforming data Data reduction algorithms, such as Principal Component Analysis (demonstrated and explained later in the chapter), can reduce the number of attributes without a significant loss in information. In addition, variables may need to be transformed to help explain the phenomenon being studied. For instance, an individual's income may be recorded in the data set as wage income; income from other sources, such as rental properties; support payments from the government, and the like. Aggregating income from all sources will develop a representative indicator for the individual income.

Often you need to transform variables from one type to another. It may be prudent to transform the continuous variable for income into a categorical variable where each record in the database is identified as low, medium, and high-income individual. This could help capture the non-linearities in the underlying behaviors.

Storing Data
The transformed data must be stored in a format that makes it conducive for data mining. The data must be stored in a format that gives unrestricted and immediate read/write privileges to the data scientist. During data mining, new variables are created, which are written back to the original database, which is why the data storage scheme should facilitate efficiently reading from and writing to the database. It is also important to store data on servers or storage media that keeps the data secure and also prevents the data mining algorithm from unnecessarily searching for pieces of data scattered on different servers or storage media. Data safety and privacy should be a prime concern for storing data.

Mining Data
After data is appropriately processed, transformed, and stored, it is subject to data mining. This step covers data analysis methods, including parametric and non-parametric methods, and machine-learning algorithms. A good starting point for data mining is data visualization. Multidimensional views of the data using the advanced graphing capabilities of data mining software are very helpful in developing a preliminary understanding of the trends hidden in the data set.

Later sections in this chapter detail data mining algorithms and methods.

Evaluating Mining Results
After results have been extracted from data mining, you do a formal evaluation of the results. Formal evaluation could include testing the predictive capabilities of the models on observed data to see how effective and efficient the algorithms have been in reproducing data. This is known as an "in-sample forecast". In addition, the results are shared with the key stakeholders for feedback, which is then incorporated in the later iterations of data mining to improve the process.

Data mining and evaluating the results becomes an iterative process such that the analysts use better and improved algorithms to improve the quality of results generated in light of the feedback received